Open Access

Protocol

Multicentre, randomised, placebo-
controlled trial of extract of Japanese
herbal medicine Daikenchuto to prevent
bowel dysfunction after adult liver
transplantation (DKB 14 Study)

Toshimi Kaido,1 Tsuyoshi Shimamura,2 Yasuhiko Sugawara,3 Hiroshi Sadamori,4
Ken Shirabe,5 Michio Yamamoto,6 Shinji Uemoto1

To cite: Kaido T,
Shimamura T, Sugawara Y,
et al. Multicentre,
randomised, placebo-
controlled trial of extract of
Japanese herbal medicine
Daikenchuto to prevent bowel
dysfunction after adult liver
transplantation (DKB 14
Study). BMJ Open 2015;5:
e008356. doi:10.1136/
bmjopen-2015-008356

▸ Prepublication history for
this paper is available online.
To view these files please
visit the journal online
(http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/
bmjopen-2015-008356).

Received 31 March 2015
Revised 26 June 2015
Accepted 7 August 2015

ABSTRACT
Introduction: This multicentre randomised controlled
clinical trial will aim to determine the ability of an
extract (TJ-100) of Daikenchuto (traditional Japanese
herbal medicine; Kampo) to prevent bowel dysfunction
in at least 110 patients after liver transplantation (LT).
Methods and analysis: The following co-primary
end points will be evaluated on postoperative day 7:
total oral and enteral caloric intake, abdominal
distension and abdominal pain. The secondary end
points will comprise sequential changes of total oral
and enteral caloric intake after LT, sequential changes
in numeric rating scales for abdominal distension and
pain, elapsed time to the first postoperative passage of
stool, quality of life assessment using the
Gastrointestinal Symptom Rating Scale score
( Japanese version), postoperative liver function, liver
regeneration rate, incidence of bacteraemia and
bacterial strain, trough level of immunosuppressants,
occurrence of acute cellular rejection, discharge or not
within 2 months after LT, sequential changes of portal
venous flow to the graft and ascites discharge. The two
arms of the study will comprise 55 patients per arm.
Ethics and dissemination: The study has been
conducted according to the CONSORT statement. All
participants signed a written consent form, and the
study has been approved by the institutional review
board of each participating institute and conducted in
accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki of 1996.
The findings will be disseminated through scientific
and professional conferences, and in peer-reviewed
journals.
Trial registration number: The DKB 14 Study was
registered in the University Hospital Medical
Information Network Clinical Trial Registration (UMIN-
CTR), Japan (registration number: UMIN000014326)
during 2014.

For numbered affiliations see
end of article.

Correspondence to
Professor Toshimi Kaido;
kaido@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp

INTRODUCTION
Liver transplantation (LT) is one of the most
extensive surgeries
for patients with end-

stage liver diseases including liver cirrhosis,
hepatocellular carcinoma and acute liver
failure. Moreover, protein-energy malnutri-
tion is common in patients with end-stage
liver disease requiring LT and closely asso-
ciated with post-transplant risk of morbidity
and mortality.1–3 Such patients are usually
accompanied by bowel dysfunction after LT
due to long surgical durations and wide
abdominal
incisions, which prevents early
postoperative food intake either orally or via
an enteral tube and subsequently leads to
worsening malnutrition.

The

after

enhanced recovery

surgery
(ERAS) protocol has recently been intro-
duced to various types of surgery including
organ transplantation.4–7 Postoperative man-
agement recommended by the ERAS proto-
col
includes the early initiation of normal
food intake or enteral feeding after gastro-
intestinal
tube
feeding
indicated for
patients in whom early oral nutrition cannot
be initiated due to obvious undernutrition at
the time of surgery. However, normal food
intake or enteral feeding cannot be started
when a patient has bowel dysfunction.

surgery. Moreover,

early

(within 24 h)

is

a traditional

Daikenchuto is

Japanese
herbal medicine (Kampo) that has been fre-
quently prescribed to prevent and treat post-
operative ileus in Japan.8 9 The powdered
extract of Daikenchuto, TJ-100 (Tsumura &
Co, Tokyo, Japan), is available as an aqueous
extract containing 2.2% Japanese pepper,
5.6% processed ginger, 3.3% ginseng and
88.9% powdered maltose syrup. A recent
multicentre phase III trial ( JFMC40-1001)
found that TJ-100 signiﬁcantly reduced the
elapsed time to the ﬁrst bowel movement
compared with a placebo after hepatic

Kaido T, et al. BMJ Open 2015;5:e008356. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2015-008356

1

Open Access

resection.10 However, the ability of TJ-100 to normalise
bowel paralysis after LT and its effects on early total
caloric intake delivered orally or enterally after surgery
(a key element of the ERAS protocol) have not been
prospectively investigated. Therefore, we designed a mul-
ticentre, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial to determine the enhancement effects of TJ-100 on
oral and enteral caloric intake and its ability to prevent
postoperative paralytic ileus in patients after undergoing
living donor LT (LDLT) or deceased donor LT (DDLT).

METHODS AND ANALYSIS
Objective
Postoperative early oral or enteral
intake is a crucial
element of the ERAS protocol. The DKB 14 Study is a
multicentre randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial that aims to determine the enhancement effect of
TJ-100 on oral and enteral caloric intake and its ability
to prevent postoperative paralytic ileus in patients after
LDLT and DDLT.

Resources
A research grant from Tsumura & Co, Tokyo, Japan.

End points
The following primary end points will be evaluated at
postoperative day (POD) 7:
▸ Total oral or enteral caloric intake;
▸ Abdominal distension determined using numeric

rating scales (NRS);

▸ Abdominal pain determined using NRS.
The following secondary end points will be evaluated:
▸ Chronological changes in total oral or enteral caloric

intake at POD 3, 5, 7, 10 and 14;

▸ Chronological changes in NRS at POD 5, 7, 10 and

14;

▸ Elapsed time from extubation until the ﬁrst post-

operative defaecation;

▸ Liver

▸ Quality of life assessment using the Gastrointestinal
Symptom Rating Scale score ( Japanese V.1.2) at POD
7 and 14;

function determined by measuring total
protein, albumin,
total bilirubin, direct bilirubin,
aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase,
γ-glutamyl transpeptidase, choline esterase at POD 3,
5, 7, 10 and 14;

▸ Liver regeneration rates determined by CT and calcu-
lated as postoperative liver volume/graft liver weight
at the time of LT between POD 14 and 21 and graft
volume for all patients except those who underwent
whole LT;

▸ The incidence of bacteraemia until POD 14 and bac-

terial strain;

▸ Trough levels of immunosuppressants at POD 3, 5, 7,

10 and 14;

▸ The incidence of acute cellular

rejection until

POD 14;

2

▸ Discharge or not within 2 months after LT;
▸ Flow speed and volume of the portal vein at POD 3,

5, 7, 10 and 14;

▸ Ascites volume (mL/day) from abdominal drain at

POD 3, 5, 7, 10 and 14.

Eligibility criteria
Inclusion
▸ Patients with end-stage liver disease who are sched-

uled to undergo LT

▸ Age ≥20 years at the time of registration
▸ Satisﬁes the indication criteria for LT at each partici-

pating institution

▸ Written informed consent provided to participate in

the study

Exclusion
▸ Uncontrollable active infection other than liver
▸ Uncontrollable malignant diseases other than hepato-

cellular carcinoma

▸ Clinically problematic dysfunction of other organs
▸ Likely to have severe intra-abdominal adhesion due to a

history of surgeries or past history of mechanical ileus

▸ Medication with antipsychotic, antidepressant or

gastrointestinal prokinetic drugs

▸ Patients who take other Kampo medicines
▸ Women who are pregnant or lactating
▸ Any other medical condition that would render a
patient unsuitable for inclusion according to the
opinion of the investigator (at each institution).

Registration
An eligibility report form will be delivered to the regis-
tration centre at
the Institute for Advancement of
Clinical and Translational Science, Kyoto University
Hospital. Eligible patients will be centrally randomised
to either Arm A (TJ-100) or Arm B (placebo) in accord-
ance with the minimisation method for assigning
patients to Arm A or Arm B according to the type of LT
(LDLT or DDLT), body weight (<60 or ≥60 kg), age
(<50 or ≥50 years) and the institution as variables before
LT. Information regarding required follow-up evaluations
will then be sent from the registration centre at the
Institute for Advancement of Clinical and Translational
Science.

The randomisation list will not be known in advance
by the investigators. The statistical analysis and prepar-
ation of tables and graphs for the report of the study by
the statistician of the study will be blinded to the extent
possible. The unblinding may take place only after all
data have been entered into the database of the study,
all requests have been closed and the database has been
frozen by the Data Manager of the study.

Treatment methods
Arm A: TJ-100 group
TJ-100 (5 g in solution) will be administered either
orally or enterally via a tube three times per day

Kaido T, et al. BMJ Open 2015;5:e008356. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2015-008356

immediately before meals or every 8 h for 14 consecutive
days between POD 1 and 14.

Arm B: placebo group
Placebo (5 g in solution) will be administered either
orally or enterally via a tube three times per day immedi-
ately before meals or every 8 h for 14 consecutive days
between POD 1 and 14.

TJ-100 and a matching placebo were manufactured by

Tsumura & Co (Tokyo, Japan).

We monitor adherence by hearing each patient and
checking the number of trial drugs (TJ-100 or placebo)
that are not administered.

Prohibited or permitted drugs
Prohibited drugs: drugs that are known to promote
bowel movement are prohibited during the protocol
treatment: erythromycin, acetylcholine chloride, itopride
hydrochloride, mosapride citrate, aclatonium napadisi-
late, neostigmine methylsulfate, pantethine, panthenol,
prostaglandin F2α, prosultiamine, fursultiamine, trime-
butine maleate, amidotrizoate sodium meglumine.

Permitted drugs: metoclopramide or domperidone to
treat postoperative nausea/vomiting, and immunosup-
pressants
steroid,
azathioprine, mizoribin and mycophenolate mofetil.

including tacrolimus, cyclosporine,

Criteria for discontinuing the protocol treatment
Grade 3 postoperative diarrhoea or other clinical
adverse effects (CTCAE V.4.0 criteria).

Data collection
Prospective data about all patients including medical
history, physical ﬁndings, laboratory ﬁndings, perioperative
clinical information and complications will be collected.

Study design and statistical analysis
The primary end points will be statistically evaluated at
POD 7 (total oral or enteral caloric intake, abdominal
distension and abdominal pain determined using NRS).
The multiplicity issue (inﬂation of type I error) due to
the analysis of three end points will be addressed using
the ﬁxed-sequence testing method. The order of the
tests will be ﬁxed, which controls the familywise error
rate. The testing procedure will start from a hypothesis
about the total oral and enteral caloric intake, and will
be followed by the NRS for abdominal distension and
the NRS for abdominal symptoms in that order. Each
test will proceed only if all previously tested hypotheses
have been rejected. Each hypothesis will be tested at the
5% signiﬁcance level. The sample size was calculated on
the basis of our previous ﬁnding that the mean value of
the total oral and enteral caloric intake at POD 7
without the administration of TJ-100 is about 1000 kcal/
day (SD=850) (unpublished data). We speculated that
patients administered with TJ-100 would have an intake
of 500 kcal/day more than those who were not adminis-
tered with TJ-100. Thus, assuming that the two arms

Open Access

in Arm B is about 0.62,

have the same SD, the sample size was calculated on the
basis of a t test with a two-sided signiﬁcance level of 5%
and a power of 80%, which resulted in a requirement of
47 patients per group. Taking about 15% exclusion from
analysis into account,
the number of patients to be
accrued was set at 55 per treatment arm (110 in total).
If the sample for analyses is 47 per group and the two-
sided signiﬁcance level is 5%, and if the probability of
an event in which the value of the NRS in Arm A is
larger than that
then the
Wilcoxon rank-sum test would have an approximate
power of 80% for each NRS test of abdominal distension
and abdominal symptoms. The ﬁrst primary end point,
the total oral and enteral caloric intake at POD 7, will
be compared between the two treatment groups using
the t test. The second and the third primary end points,
the values of NRS on abdominal distension and abdom-
inal pain, will be compared between the two treatment
groups using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test. When the
total oral and caloric enteral intake data at POD 7 for 50
patients are collected, we will conduct an interim ana-
lysis to conﬁrm the distribution of total oral and enteral
caloric intake at POD 7 under double-blind conditions.
If the distribution obviously deviates from the normal
distribution, then the Wilcoxon rank-sum test will be
used for the primary analysis of
the total oral and
enteral caloric intake at POD 7.

Participating institutions
Fourteen leading Japanese institutions that perform LT
will participate in this trial.

Registration of the protocol
The protocol was approved by the institutional review
board of each participating institute and conducted in
accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki of 1996.
Written informed consent will be obtained from all
patients before enrolment and randomisation by investi-
registered in the
gators. The DKB 14 Study was
University Hospital Medical
Information Network
Clinical Trial Registration (UMIN-CTR), Japan (registra-
tion number: UMIN000014326) during 2014.

Study status
This study is currently collecting data and there has not
been any publication concerning the analysis of the data
collected to date.

Author affiliations
1Division of Hepato-Biliary-Pancreatic and Transplant Surgery, Department of
Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan
2Division of Organ Transplantation, Hokkaido University Hospital, Sapporo,
Japan
3Artificial Organ and Transplantation Division, Department of Surgery,
Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
4Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Okayama University Graduate
School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, Japan
5Department of Surgery and Science, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan

Kaido T, et al. BMJ Open 2015;5:e008356. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2015-008356

3

Open Access

6Institute for Advancement of Clinical and Translational Science, Kyoto
University Hospital, Kyoto, Japan

Contributors TK and SU conceived the study. All the authors were involved in
development of the study protocol. TK prepared the first draft of the
manuscript and all the authors critically reviewed, revised and approved the
subsequent and final version.

Funding This work was supported by a research grant from Tsumura & Co,
Tokyo, Japan.

5.

Competing interests None declared.

Ethics approval The protocol was approved by the institutional review board
of each participating hospital.

Patient consent Obtained.

Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.

Open Access This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with
the Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license,
which permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-
commercially, and license their derivative works on different terms, provided
the original work is properly cited and the use is non-commercial. See: http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/

REFERENCES
1. Selberg O, Böttcher J, Tusch G, et al. Identification of high-and

low-risk patients before liver transplantation: a prospective cohort
study of nutritional and metabolic parameters in 150 patients.
Hepatology 1997;25:625–57.

2. Sanchez AJ, Aranda-Michel J. Nutrition for the liver transplant

patient. Liver Transplant 2006;12:1310–16.

3. Stickel F, Inderbitzin D, Candinas D. Role of nutrition in liver
transplantation for end-stage chronic liver disease. Nutr Rev
2008;66:47–54.

4. Weimann A, Braga M, Harsanyi L, et al. ESPEN Guidelines on

Enteral Nutrition: Surgery including organ transplantation. Clin Nutr
2006;25:224–44.
Lassen K, Coolsen MM, Slim K, et al., ERAS® Society; European
Society for Clinical Nutrition and Metabolism; International
Association for Surgical Metabolism and Nutrition. Guidelines for
perioperative care for pancreaticoduodenectomy: Enhanced
Recovery After Surgery (ERAS®) Society recommendations. Clin
Nutr 2012;31:817–30.

6. Gustafsson UO, Scott MJ, Schwenk W, et al., Enhanced Recovery
After Surgery Society. Guidelines for perioperative care in elective
colonic surgery: Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS®) Society
recommendations. Clin Nutr 2012;31:783–800.

7. Mortensen K, Nilsson M, Slim K, et al., Enhanced Recovery After

Surgery (ERAS®) Group. Consensus guidelines for enhanced
recovery after gastrectomy: Enhanced Recovery After Surgery
(ERAS®) Society recommendations. Br J Surg 2014;101:1209–29.
8. Endo S, Nishida T, Nishikawa K, et al. Dai-kenchu-to, a Chinese

herbal medicine, improves stasis of patients with total
gastrectomy and jejunal pouch interposition. Am J Surg 2006;192:
9–13.
Iwai N, Kume Y, Kimura O, et al. Effects of herbal medicine
Dai-Kenchu-to on anorectal function in children with severe
constipation. Eur J Pediatr Surg 2007;17:115–18.

9.

10. Shimada M, Morine Y, Nagano H, et al. Effect of TU-100, a

traditional Japanese medicine, administered after hepatic resection
in patients with liver cancer: a multi-center, phase III trial
( JFMC40-1001). Int J Clin Oncol 2015;20:95–104.

4

Kaido T, et al. BMJ Open 2015;5:e008356. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2015-008356

Review for Exploring and visualizing an EEG + personality dataset by Yevheniia Kryvenko What is great about this work is that it was clear about what was done and why. Nice introduction, description of all used methods and data, sufficient number of figures and formulas. Paper was easy to read, it is logical, well-structured, no much problems with typesetting and references. However, there were moments, where I disagree with author: “the accuracy is less than 60% that is not much better than random guess” – I think that even such accuracy is significant, especially if one of the task is to research, whether we can reconstruct five major traits from data; “It is impossible to set up the certain criteria, as mean square error or etc, because the output is a decision to accept or reject a hypothesis” – I think that author should try some statistical tests, with correspondent null hypothesis (rejecting or accepting this null hypothesis will be certain criteria of success).  Evaluation criterion No Rather no than yes More or less Rather yes than no Yes The paper is well readable    +  Language used in the paper is correct    +  The paper is logical and well structured    +  The general typeset of the paper is correct    +  The paper was interesting to read     + The paper gives a good overview of the topic   +   The material in the paper is mathematically correct    +  References to the external sources are presented correctly   +   All the relevant references are present    +   The formulas are typed correctly   +    Answer the following questions in free text. 1. How to evaluate the selection of the topic? I think that title of the paper does not represent its content well. However, problem, described in paper, is important and interesting. 2. How to evaluate general presentation style? General presentation style was good. 3. How to evaluate the selection of the information given in the paper? Overview and background of using methods was good, however, more detailed information about setting experiment is needed. 4. How to evaluate typesetting of the paper? In general, typesetting of the paper is correct. 5. What was new and interesting to me in the paper? Task, described in the paper, was new and interesting. 6. What else would I have liked to read? Results, obtained about this task. Please refer to specific shortcomings. 1. The paper has the following misprints: “Since power spectra of EEG data are high dimensional dataset” – maybe, there should be “power spectrum … is”. 2. The paper has the following mistakes in wording and style: I have not found mistakes in wording or style. 3. The paper has the following mathematical mistakes: There were no much mathematical materials, except definition of Fast Fourier Transform, where everything seems to be correct.  4. The paper has the following mistakes in typesetting: It was not yet presented in paper-like format. 5. The paper will be more readable if the author makes the following changes: Paper needs more clear description about experiment. Maybe, some schemes can help to understand it better. 6. The paper misses the following elements (topics, references, figures, proof steps, etc.):  Some methods descriptions (e.g. PCA) miss references. 7. The following elements could be removed from the paper: Description of used methods (FFT, PCA, t-SNE) can be shorter of even removed. 8. Other comments: I would like to read final results of this work.  